THE ROSE-BUSH


The Rose-bush did not know where she was born and where she spent her
early days—it is a well known fact that flowers have a bad memory, but
to make up for that they can see into the future. When she first became
conscious of herself, she stood in the middle of a magnificent green
lawn. To one side of her she saw a great white stone house, that
gleamed through the branches of linden trees, to the other side stood a
high trellised gate through which she could see the street.

A thin tall man carefully tended the Rose-bush; he brought manure,
bound the drooping twigs of the Rose-bush together with bark, brought
water for the thirsty roots of the Rose-bush to drink. The Rose-bush
was grateful to the man, and as the buds she was covered with opened
into dainty red roses, she said to her friend, You have taken care of
me, it is because of you that I have become so beautiful. Take some of
my loveliest blossoms in return.

The man shook his head. You mean well, dear Rose-bush, and I would
gladly take some of your beautiful blossoms for my sick wife. But I
dare not do it. You don’t belong to me.

I don’t belong to you! exclaimed the Rose-bush. Don’t I belong to
the person who has taken care of me and troubled himself about me? Then
to whom do I belong?

The man pointed with his hand to the gleaming white house among the
trees and replied, To the gracious lady who lives there.

That can’t be, replied the Rose-bush. I have never seen this lady.
It is not she who has sprinkled water on me, loosened the earth at my
roots, bound together my twigs. Then how can I belong to her?

She has bought you.

That is something different. Then the poor woman must have worked hard
to save so much money. Good! Half of my blossoms shall belong to her.

The man laughed a little sadly, saying, Oh, beloved Rose-bush, you
don’t yet know the world, I can see that. The lady did not lift a
finger to earn the money.

Then how did she get it?

She owns a great factory in which countless workers drudge; from there
comes her wealth.

The Rose-bush became angry, lifted a bough up high, threatened the man
with her thorn-claws, shouting, I see you enjoy yourself at my expense
because I am still young and inexperienced, telling me untruths about
the world of men. Still I am not so stupid, I have observed ants and
bees, and know that to each belongs the things for which he has
worked.

That may be so among bees and ants, the man sighed deeply, yet among
men it is different. There the people receive just enough to keep them
from starving—all else belongs to the master. The master builds
splendid mansions, plants lovely gardens, buys flowers.

Is that really true?

Yes.

The man went back to his work and the Rose-bush began to meditate. Yet
the longer she thought, the worse her temper grew. Yes, even though she
usually had very fine manners, she spoke roughly to a bee who wished to
visit her. The bee was still young and timid, and flew off in fright as
fast as his wings could carry him. Then the Rose-bush was sorry for her
rough behavior, because she was naturally friendly, and also because
she might have asked the bee whether the man had spoken the truth.